Strategy and Details 1


Hi. 
Let's look at a model for classification called K Nearest Neighbors, or, for short, k-NN. 
So let's get back to our example here or what we'd like to look at. 
We are trying to classify somebody as being qualified for a credit card or not.

And we've got two variables to help us do that, two explanatory variables--

credit score rating and income. 
So let's look and see what our person has. 
They have an income of $92,000, and they have a credit score of 694. 
And so one intuitive strategy here would just be to say, well, let's find people that are similar to this person.

Let's find people that have something close to $92,000, something close to 694, and we'll just adopt what they are. 
If they were qualified, then we'll say, this person's qualified. 
And if they were not, then we'll say that they were not. 
So what we've done here is there are 11 people that we've labeled that we know they were qualified or they were not--

or they were accepted to this credit card or they were not accepted this credit card. 
Those are 11 people there. 
So if they qualified, it was kind of an orange peach for no and a green or blue there for yes. 
And that's our training set.

So that's what we've got there. 
So moving on, our strategy is going to be simple. 
So for k-NN--

this is really going to be 3-NN that we talk about right now--

is the k is the number of people we're going to look at. 
So I'm just going to be right here sitting at $92,000 and 694, which is that point that we see right here. 
And I'm going to look for the three people that are closest to me. 
And it's nice that I pick an odd number for k, because in the end, if there's only two things that can happen--

a yes or a no, in this case--

I won't have a tie. 
So I'm going to look around and say, hm, I'm just going to take majority rules. 
If all three of the nearest people to me were accepted, then I'll say that I'm accepted. 
And if they all three were denied, I'll say I was denied, but if two out of three were accepted, then I'll go with the accepted.

So we'll then choose those three closest subjects, and then let majority rule right after that. 
But what do we really mean by "close"? So by "close," we mean there's a lot of distances. 
In this class, we'll talk about the Euclidean distance, but there's tons of other--

if you look in our textbook or even just on the web, there's a Mahalanobis distance. 
There's all sorts of other distances to think about. 
But Euclidean distance is, probably by far, the most used one and the one that we have most intuitive practice with. 
So we've got the Pythagorean theorem there.

So basically, all we're going to do is say, here is our point, and we're going to look, and we're going to say, let's say it's this to the 12th point. 
So x credit score 12 minus x credit score theta, where theta is all of these other 11. 
We're going to do this for each one. 
So for each one, right now, I'm just looking at this particular point, saying that that's 0.7.

So I'm going to say, xrc12 minus xrc7. 
I'm going to square that, plus y income 12, minus y income 7. 
I'm going to square that. 
And that, if I do that, that will give me this distance, 23.26.

We can see what we did here. 
So it's the 694, 715. 
This green or blue dot here is about 715. 
And it's about a 102 in just over 100 there, so it's about 102 in income.

And so that was, after I've done the math, about 23.26 units away. 
So I would do that for this one, which looks a lot closer. 
I'd do it for this one, which actually looks a lot closer, and maybe that's the third one.

So that's the idea. 
It's a pretty intuitive idea. 
So moving on, there is the circle that I would draw there, and it's got the three closest ones are this one, this one, and that one. 
And it's pretty easy to see now that if we go with majority rule, with k equals 3, that we will guess that this person will not qualify.

So we'd classify this person as a no, because we've got this person and this person for nos, and we did have a yes, but two beats one. 
And so 66% of those that were nearest to us were no, so we'll guess that we're a no. 
Could be wrong, but we're going to go with what the evidence suggests. 
So that is a quick look at 3-NN, or k-NN with k equals 3 to classify.

Awesome job. 
I'll see you next time.

