Naive Bayes the Basics Example

Hi, 
now let's look at an example using Bayes' theorem and also ask the additional question of why do we call it naive Bayes. 
What's the naive part? So we're going to look at an example in the setting of volleyball and ask if a friend of mine, 
Sammy, 
will play volleyball today based on some of the conditions. 
So what are we going to do?

As usual, 
we go out and collect some data. 
And we want to see if the outlook and if the wind conditions can help us determine better than a 50/50 flip if Sammy is outside playing volleyball today. 
So we've recorded the outlook. 
And that's either sunny, 
cloudy, 
or rainy.

We've recorded the wind conditions, 
either high or low. 
And we're recorded on those days whether or not Sammy played volleyball. 
And from that we'll ask, 
if it is sunny and windy today based on the past, 
based on what we know about Sammy's past, 
if it's sunny and windy, 
is he outside playing volleyball. 
Will he play volleyball?

So that'll be the pretty simple but interesting question. 
So let's go ahead and move to the naive Bayes part. 
So naive Bayes, 
what makes it naive is that we're assuming conditional independence. 
And that's what we see here in our equation is saying conditional 
on volleyball.

So saying once we know whether or not he played volleyball or not, 
are outlook and wind independent. 
So let's say that, 
yep, 
let's look at all the days or let's just say that Sammy's playing 
volleyball today, 
is the probability of it being sunny independent of the probability 
of it being high or low. 
Or does it being sunny somehow give me some information about 
whether or not it's windy or not. 
Or if it's cloudy, 
does that give me some information about it being windy or not?

And if you're like, 
you know what, 
it does make sense that if it's cloudy, 
maybe it is a higher probability of being windy. 
So I'm not so sure I like this naive Bayes assumption of 
conditional independence because being cloudy does maybe 
increase the probability of wind. 
If you believe that, 
then this assumption is broken. 
But that's an important thing to know about naive Bayes 
is that that's a really strong assumption.

Now naive Bayes can be robust to this assumption. 
Researchers use naive Bayes anyhow because it's in some cases 
almost for sure that this assumption will be broken. 
But again, 
all models are wrong and some are useful. 
And this model can still be useful even if the naive assumption 
is not met.

But important to know that the naive assumption, 
that's why they call it naive, 
is that we're assuming that the explanatory variables are 
independent, 
conditional on the levels of the outcome. 
In this case, 
volleyball. 
So here's where we left off. 
And we still see our naive Bayes assumption of conditional independence.

We're still asking if Sammy is going to play volleyball given that it's sunny and high wind. 
So here is the mathematical equation. 
If we're trying to apply Bayes' theorem to it, 
we're going to ask, 
hey, 
we know that it's sunny and high wind, 
what's the probability that Sammy's playing volleyball. 
That's how we'd write that mathematically.

Again, 
what's the probability of volleyball given the fact that we know that it's sunny and high wind? I don't know that. 
So what I'd like to do is use the information that I have here to estimate that. 
And I can flip it around using Bayes' theorem.

So that's the probability now of sunny and high wind given that we're playing volleyball, 
times the probability of playing volleyball, 
divided by the probability of it being sunny and high wind and general out there. 
So maybe pause and really soak that in. 
Look at the definition of Bayes' theorem, 
make sure that all these variables match up, 
and then we'll continue. 
Reverse that first for a second, 
notice that this piece is the same as this piece.

We're going to use that naive Bayes assumption to break this up. 
The probability of sunny and high wind given volleyball can be written as the probability of sunny given volleyball, 
times the probability of high wind given volleyball, 
because they're conditionally independent, 
times the probability of volleyball. 
Well, 
the probability of volleyball here is just, 
what's the probability that on any given day Sammy is out there playing volleyball. 
That's the prior, 
that's the prior probability.

Given the past, 
I think we're going to find that he's played volleyball about 
60% of the time. 
Out of these 10 days, 
he is playing volleyball--

those six yeses there. 
So looking at that, 
that's the numerator. 
The denominator, 
the probability of sunny and high wind, 
can be written as you see it here in the denominator. 
It's the probability of sunny given volleyball, 
probability of high wind given volleyball, 
times probability of volleyball, 
again that's the naive Bayes assumption, 
plus this piece here.

So it looks rather not complicated, 
but there's a lot of terms there. 
But they're very easy to find each term given the table. 
So here it is. 
So what we're seeing here, 
and I'll do a couple of these, 
and you can verify the rest is what's the probability of sunny 
given volleyball.

So given volleyball over here, 
I know there's a yes, 
one, 
two, 
three yeses, 
four five, 
six yeses. 
So given that he's playing volleyball, 
I'm just looking at these six rows. 
And in those six rows, 
it was sunny one, 
two, 
right? Right here, 
actually it was sunny on this day and sunny on that day.

And so out of those six, 
it was sunny on two of those six days. 
So that's two out of six. 
The probability that he's playing volleyball--

I only saw him playing volleyball six times, 
it was sunny on two of those days. 
So the probability of sunny given volleyball is two out of six. 
Let's do the same thing for high wind. 
So looking over here, 
there's again the same six days that he's playing volleyball.

Let's see high wind. 
So high wind, 
so right here. 
So this was the day that it was sunny, 
it was not high wind. 
This was sunny, 
it was high wind.

So there's a high wind. 
This day, 
no. 
This day, 
no. 
This day, 
yes. 
So there's two high winds.

And this day, 
no. 
So it's only to high winds out of those six days. 
So again, 
that's two out of six. 
And then finally, 
what's the probability of volleyball?

We already said that there's 10 total days up here, 
there's six out of 10. 
So that's six out of 10 for each of those. 
So I'll let you verify these here in the denominator, 
but it's the same idea of given volleyball. 
And down here note that for these, 
those are four.

Notice those are over four, 
or these are over four. 
That's because that's the probability of sunny given no volleyball. 
So no volleyball, 
there's only four days up here. 
So I'll just verify that one here.

So here's one two, 
three, 
four days of not playing volleyball. 
One of those was sunny, 
it's right here. 
And so sunny and no volleyball, 
so that's where that 1/4 came from. 
So go ahead and verify all of those.

And if you do, 
we'll see that when you multiply that, 
the probability of volleyball or the estimated probability of 
Sammy volleyball given that it's sunny and windy outside is about 47%. 
And if my threshold was 50%, 
I'd classify Sammy not playing volleyball today. 
So, 
yeah, 
let's see if Sammy wants to go see a movie or something because 
I doubt he's out there playing volleyball. 
So how can we do this in R?

So what we're going to do is use a package called e1071, 
a very numerical odd package name. 
But we're going to install this package, 
e1071. 
And it's got a function in it called naive Bayes. 
And I'm going to, 
of course, 
bring it into my session using library.

And here is the syntax. 
So the syntax is naive Bayes, 
and you tell it the response, 
tilde. 
And then if you put a dot, 
it means use everything else as explanatory variables. 
I could have put in here outlook plus wind.

But instead, 
I just said, 
hey, 
I want I want outlook wind, 
so I'll put a dot. 
So whenever you see that dot, 
it means all of it. 
Like the wild card character, 
but it's not a regular expression. 
And then data says, 
OK, 
go to this data set called vball, 
which I loaded in here.

And you can do that. 
So I've given you this data, 
and really encourage you to do that, 
just almost assuming that you're doing this is to grab the 
data and load it to a data frame called vball. 
And then it says, 
OK, 
well, 
I know that there's columns called outlook, 
wind, 
and volleyball, 
and vball, 
and you're ready to go. 
So here we'll have the data frame.

I want to know specifically outlook equals sunny and wind equals high. 
So that's the day I care about. 
And once I've fit the model here and I come up with a df equals the data frame, 
so now in this side of this data frame I have sunny and wind. 
Then just put in predict model, 
and pass it the outlook equals sunny and wind equals high, 
which is what this data frame is.

And it will give you the classifications. 
And if not then, 
if you want to put type equals raw, 
then it will give you this. 
So type equals raw, 
it will say no is 52% and yes is 47%. 
So that's that.

So what would be our conclusion? Is the posterior, 
this is known as posterior probability. 
So we had the prior probability of playing volleyball was 60%. 
But after we know about the outlook and wind, 
we can say the posterior probability of him playing volleyball is 47%.

So since the posterior probability associated with playing volleyball 
on a sunny and highly windy day is 0.4706, 
which is less than the posterior probability of not playing volleyball 
in the same conditions, 
for this reason we'll predict that Sammy is not playing volleyball 
today. 
We don't have a lot of confidence in this because it's so close. 
If it was like 90/10, 
I'd have a lot more confidence.

But if I had to make a decision, 
I would probably choose that he is not playing volleyball today. 
And that's how we can do it with R and naive Bayes using R and doing 
it by hand. 
Great job on this one. 
I'll see you next time.

