Naive Bayes The Basics

Hi. 
Let's begin with an example. 
Here is our example. 
Let's say that we've got a friend named Bob.

And he thinks he might have a rare disease. 
So he goes out and takes a test for this disease. 
And the test comes back positive. 
So Bob's a little worried.

So he decides to go research this test a little bit. 
And so he goes out and researches the test. 
Goes and gets the statistics on the test. 
And he finds that for those who have the disease, 
for those who actually have the disease, 
90% test positive.

So there's a 90% true positive rate there. 
So then he finds out that for those who do not have the disease, 
that 80% will test negative. 
So those are some statistics on whether or not, 
maybe they came from the FDA, 
on how good the test performs. 
No test is perfect.

So these are the statistics for this particular test. 
So let's go ahead and review Bayes' theorem. 
Because Bayes' theorem might end up helping us solve this problem. 
Because Bob's curious.

He's thinking I've tested positive for the disease now. 
So what is the probability that I actually have the disease? So we'll look here. 
This is Bayes' theorem.

So I have probability of A given B equals a probability of B given A. 
Good old Reverend Bayes has provided this for us. 
Times the probability of A divided by the probability of B. 
That is Bayes' theorem.

So what we're probably concerned about, 
what Bob is probably concerned about, 
is whether or not he has the disease given that he has tested positive for this test. 
So remember that this vertical line here means given. 
It's a conditional probability. 
So what we're concerned with, 
what we'd like to calculate is the probability of having the disease given that we've tested positive, 
or given that Bob has tested positive.

And that's what this is saying. 
Now, 
given that this has happened, 
that we've tested positive, 
what is the probability of having the disease? So if I write out the formula here, 
we'll see that this is the probability of testing positive given the disease times the probability of having the disease divided by the probability of testing positive. 
So let's go back to our test.

And we'll begin to fill some of these in. 
So for those who have the disease, 
90% test positive. 
So what this is saying that the probability of testing positive given that someone has the disease is equal to 90%. 
And a lot of people get these two confounded, 
thinking that I've tested positive for this test.

So there's a 90% chance that I have the disease. 
And that's not the case here at all, 
as we'll find here shortly. 
It's for those who have the disease, 
90% of them will test positive. 
So that means, 
if we contrast this, 
that the probability of testing negative if you have the disease is 10%.

You've got to do one or the other. 
You either test positive or you test negative. 
So for those who do not have the disease, 
80% will test negative. 
So we'll write those statistics down.

So for those who do not have the disease, 
we've got 80% will test negative. 
So negative given not disease is equal to 0.8, 
meaning that the probability of positive given not disease actually equals 0.2. 
So for people that do not have the disease, 
20% will actually come back positive for the test.

So great. 
So I haven't provided you one piece of information here. 
But let's go ahead, 
I'll make the suspense build here a little bit. 
Maybe you'll figure it out.

Or maybe you've already figured it out. 
So the probability of positive given disease is 0.9. 
That's great. 
And the probability of having the disease, 
we don't have that on here.

And that is fundamental to Bayes' theorem. 
That's what's known as the prior. 
So the prior is saying, 
hey, 
what do we know about this disease to begin with? Is it a really rare diseases?

Is it a really frequent disease? Is it kind of an epidemic type disease? That's the piece that I haven't provided you over here. 
So I'm going to go ahead and provide you and say it's a super rare 
disease.

So yes, 
he's tested positive. 
But it is a super rare disease. 
So I'm going to say the probability of having the disease is equal to, 
and I'll make that 0.001. 
So 0.001,

meaning that if we have 1,000 people, 
that about one out of 1,000 will have this disease. 
Maybe that's not super rare. 
But we'll say that the probability of having the disease is 0.001. 
So I'm going to fill that in here.

So that's 0.001. 
And then we'll divide by--

and we've actually got the probability of positive. 
This is what makes Naive Bayes the naive part, 
is that if we have the naive Bayes part, 
we can write this as the probability of a positive given D 
times the probability of having the disease plus the probability 
of positive given IND times the probability of IND. 
So the probability of testing positive is this probability of 
testing positive given you have the disease times the probability 
of the disease occurring in the first place. 
And the probability of testing positive not having the disease 
and the probability of not having the disease in the first place.

So let's go ahead and calculate these. 
This is all about calculation. 
So we've got 0.0009, 
those two multiplied.

And then we've got here, 
let's start filling in the blanks, 
so basically, 
this is the same thing. 
So 0.0009, 
right? P positive D, 
PD.

P positive D by D. 
That usually always turns out that way where you've got the 
numerator repeated. 
And then I'll add to it the probability of positive. 
So this is a 0.2

times the probability of not having the disease, 
which is the last piece we'll put on here, 
probability of no disease. 
That's equal to 1 minus that, 
0.999. 
So this is 0.999. 
So great.

So let's see. 
Bob is waiting. 
We need to tell him what we think about the probability that he has the disease, 
given that he's tested positive for this test. 
If we do all this math right here, 
we end up with 0.0045,

so just under a half a percent chance that he has this disease. 
So he's probably relieved. 
But regardless, 
the truth is is that given these statistics and the naive Bayes method, 
we have that given that he has tested positive for the test, 
the probability that he has the disease can be calculated to be 0.0045. 
So nice job.

